.\".\" Copyright (c) 2011 Gregor Klinke. All Rights Reserved.
.\" The following commands are required for all man pages.
.Dd January 26, 2011
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Dt HRC 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm hrc
.Nd compiler for the herschel programming language
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Pcsb
.Op Fl O | On
.Op Fl d Ar outdir
.Op Fl I Ar inputdir
.Op Fl D Ar var Ns = Ns Ar value
.Bk
.Ar FileName ...
.Ek
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a compiler for
.Em herschel
, a general purpose, multi-paradigm programming
language.  It takes filenames and compiles it into platform specific object
files which can be linked into standalone executables.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl d Ar outdir
Output all generated files to
.Ar outdir
.\"
.It Fl I Ar inputdir
Add
.Ar inputdir
to the input searchlist
.\"
.It Fl D Ar var Ns = Ns Ar value
Define config
.Ar var
to be
.Ar value
.El
.\"
.Ss Optimization options
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl O
Optimize code more
.\"
.It Fl On
Turn off any (even basic) optimization
.El
.\" The following commands should be uncommented and
.\" used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.\" This next command is for sections 2, 3 and 9 function
.\" return values only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" This next command is for sections 1, 6, 7 and 8 only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" This next command is for sections 1, 6, 7, 8 and 9 only
.\"     (command return values (to shell) and
.\"     fprintf/stderr type diagnostics).
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ex -std hrc
.\" .Sh COMPATIBILITY
.\" This next command is for sections 2, 3 and 9 error
.\"     and signal handling only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr herschel 7
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Gregor Klinke" Aq gck@eyestep.org
.\" .Sh BUGS
